<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="topic_p52_4xn_mwb">
    <title>European Union Emissions Trading System</title>
    <body>
        <p>The European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) is a "cap and trade" scheme where a
            limit is placed on the right to emit specified pollutants over an area and companies can
            trade emission rights within that area. It covers around 45% of the EUs greenhouse gas
                    emissions.<sup><xref
                    href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Emissions_Trading_System#cite_note-1"
                    format="html" scope="external">[1]</xref></sup></p>
        <p>Under the "cap and trade" principle, a maximum (cap) is set on the total amount of
            greenhouse gases.</p>
        <p><xref href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EU_Allowance" format="html" scope="external">EU
                Allowances</xref> for emissions are then auctioned off or allocated for free, and
            can subsequently be traded.  Installations must <xref
                href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carbon_monitoring" format="html"
                scope="external">monitor</xref> and report their CO<sub>2</sub> emissions, ensuring
            they hand in enough allowances to the authorities to cover their emissions. If emission
            exceeds what is permitted by its allowances, an installation must purchase allowances
            from others. Conversely, if an installation has performed well at reducing its
            emissions, it can sell its leftover credits.</p>
        <p>The scheme has been divided into a number of "trading periods" as follows:</p>
        <section id="section_hwx_vxn_mwb">
            <title>Phase 1</title>
            <p>In the first phase (2005–2007), the EU ETS included some 12,000 installations,
                representing approximately 40% of EU CO<sub>2</sub> emissions, covering energy
                activities (combustion installations with a rated thermal input exceeding 20 <xref
                    href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Megawatt" format="html" scope="external"
                    >MW</xref>, mineral oil refineries, coke ovens), production and processing of
                ferrous metals, mineral industry (cement clinker, glass and ceramic bricks) and
                pulp, paper and board activities.<sup><xref
                        href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Emissions_Trading_System#cite_note-46"
                        format="html" scope="external">[46]</xref></sup></p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_egd_xxn_mwb">
            <title>Phase 2</title>
            <p>The second phase (2008–12) expanded the scope of the scheme significantly. In 2007,
                three non-EU members, <xref href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norway"
                    format="html" scope="external">Norway</xref>, <xref
                    href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iceland" format="html" scope="external"
                    >Iceland</xref>, and <xref href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liechtenstein"
                    format="html" scope="external">Liechtenstein</xref> joined the scheme.<sup><xref
                        href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Emissions_Trading_System#cite_note-53"
                        format="html" scope="external">[53]</xref></sup> The EU's "Linking
                Directive" introduced the <xref
                    href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clean_Development_Mechanism" format="html"
                    scope="external">CDM</xref> and <xref
                    href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joint_Implementation" format="html"
                    scope="external">JI</xref> credits. Although this was a theoretical possibility
                in phase I, the over-allocation of permits combined with the inability to bank them
                for use in the second phase meant it was not taken up.<sup><xref
                        href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Emissions_Trading_System#cite_note-54"
                        format="html" scope="external">[54]</xref></sup></p>
            <p>On 27 April 2012, the European Commission announced the full activation of the EU
                Emissions Trading System single registry. The full activation process included the
                migration of over 30,000 EU ETS accounts from national registries. The European
                Commission further stated that the single registry to be activated in June will not
                contain all the required functionalities for phase III of the EU ETS.<sup><xref
                        href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Emissions_Trading_System#cite_note-55"
                        format="html" scope="external">[55]</xref></sup></p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_lsy_yxn_mwb">
            <title>Phase 3</title>
            <p>For Phase III (2013–2020), the European Commission implemented a number of changes,
                including (CCC, 2008, p. 149):<sup><xref
                        href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Emissions_Trading_System#cite_note-ccc-66"
                        format="html" scope="external">[66]</xref></sup></p>
            <ul id="ul_bsh_zxn_mwb">
                <li>the setting of an overall EU cap, with allowances then allocated to EU
                    members;</li>
                <li>tighter limits on the use of offsets;</li>
                <li>limiting banking of allowances between Phases II and III;</li>
                <li>a move from allowances to auctioning;</li>
                <li>and the inclusion of more sectors and gases.</li>
            </ul>
        </section>
        <section id="section_ij1_1yn_mwb">
            <title>Phase 4</title>
            <p>Phase IV commenced on 1 January 2021 and will finish on 31 December 2030.<sup><xref
                        href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Emissions_Trading_System#cite_note-89"
                        format="html" scope="external">[85]</xref></sup> The European Commission
                plans a full review of the Directive by 2026. Since 2018, prices have continuously
                increased, reaching €57/tCO<sub>2</sub> (67 $) in July 2021.<sup><xref
                        href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Union_Emissions_Trading_System#cite_note-90"
                        format="html" scope="external">[86]</xref></sup>. This results in additional
                costs of about €0.04/kWh for coal and €0.02/kWh for gas combustion for
                electricity.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</topic>